Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
James Gunn approaches science fiction from many angles.
He writes it, he teaches it, and he's published important historical and critical material
in science fiction.
Some of Gunn's better known novels include the Joymakers, the Immortals, the Listeners,
and the Dreamers.
The Immortals was the basis for the television show of a few years back, The Immortal.
Gunn's critical work, in addition to numerous essays, consists of two major publications,
Alternate Worlds, a 1975 history of science fiction, and The Road to Science Fiction,
a four-volume anthology that includes Gunn's essays on the definition of science fiction
and its historical development.
Gunn's criticism is valuable because it not only comes from someone who knows the field,
but also because Gunn is a scholar and professor at a major university.
He brings the insight of a professional academic to the field.
We talked with Gunn about how he divides himself between being both a writer and a teacher.
We asked him if he'd ever considered writing as a full-time career.
I did, as a matter of fact, write full-time for a period of a little more than three years,
a year, in 1948-49, and I went back to school then and got a master's degree, but I continued
to write, and then after I'd worked for this paperback publisher, after I got my master's
degree, worked for a paperback publisher for a year and a half, I found out that I'd sold
four stories that I hadn't known about and decided to go back to full-time writing.
So I did write full-time from the fall of 1942 until the late summer of 1948.
I did write a book in 1955, and really much of the groundwork for the later books that
I published and the success that I had, I think, especially it was, was based upon that
freelance period. I didn't make a lot of money at it, you know, below the poverty level,
but my needs were fairly simple at that time, and what it later paid off in the late 1950s
was, in the sense that the stories that I wrote appeared in books, and some of them
even were made in the movies and all that sort of thing.
Gunn explains how I became involved in teaching.
It was after 1955, or in the fall of 1955, after my wife and I had moved back to Lawrence,
Kansas, simply as a place to live, that I got involved almost by accident with teaching
at the university, from which I'd gotten my two degrees, the University of Kansas, and
became involved with other aspects of the university, edited the alumni magazine for
three years, and then became director of public relations for the university for twelve years,
before returning to full-time teaching and writing in 1970.
Gunn had always intended to write science fiction criticism.
But looking back upon it, I know, I think right from the beginning, I had the feeling
that I wanted to do criticism in the area. My first ten stories, for instance, were
published under a pseudonym of Edwin James, using, I began to use my own name with the
reason I can remember now for doing that, was the fact that I thought I would write
criticism about science fiction, and I wanted to save my real name for that. But after ten
stories, I decided that was foolish, and I ought to use my real name for everything.
But looking back upon it, I think the academic interest was there right from the beginning.
Beginning next time, we'll talk with James Gunn about his writing, both the stories and
the criticism.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy. And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Anne. James Gunn, author, critic and teacher of science fiction,
has written some valuable books on the definition and historical development of science fiction.
He's examining some big questions in this work, things like what is science fiction,
what makes it different from other literature, and where it comes from.
And since Gunn is a professor at the University of Kansas, besides being a long time author
of science fiction, he combines a scholar's objectivity and a creator's understanding
in answering these questions.
Alternate Worlds, published in 1976, is his first major critical work. Gunn explains its
origin.
I had, when I first went back to full-time teaching, had been asked if I would teach
a science fiction course, which is different from the experience at most universities,
where there is some resistance to the notion of doing that. And I accepted because I had
the feeling that there wasn't a good history of science fiction, and that this course would
give me the incentive to write it. So I sat down and wrote very fast, and ended up with
13 chapters representing about 13 lectures for the 14-week semester. And these chapters
or these lectures became the 13 chapters in a book of mine, which appeared in about,
I guess, 75, after some delays, as Alternate Worlds, the illustrated history of science
fiction. But as it won consequence of its publication, I got a call one day from an
editor at New American Library who was admiring it and asked me if I'd like to do a book
for them. And I knew also that I really felt the need for anthologies which covered more
than the brief span of the 20s to the 60s, which most anthologies did, and there really
wasn't much in the 20s or 30s most of it, appeared, covered the period of the 40s and
50s. So I said yes, and I sent them a proposal for the first volume of the Road Science Fiction.
At that time, all we knew that there would be would be one volume which covered the period
from the earliest prehistory of literature, not to mention science fiction, up to 1900
and the H.G. Wells' early stories and novels. The volume used a unique and valuable approach
to science fiction criticism. It was an anthology of stories, but each story was accompanied
by an essay which covered the story's importance and also discussed the period of science fiction
history to which it belonged. Gunn explains how that volume led to others.
By the time I got finished with the manuscript, I had felt that it really, unlike most books,
came out even better than I thought it was going to, and I proposed that we go ahead
with a second and third volume. They said, let's wait and see how this does, and eventually
after it had done better than they thought, they agreed that I could go on to volume two
and three, which covered the period from 1900 to approximately 1940, and then from 1940
to 1970, or actually late 1976. Gunn has recently published a fourth volume in the
science fiction series and says that it's now finished. The title for the entire series
is the Road to Science Fiction, and it stands as a major work of science fiction criticism.
We'll talk some more about it with James Gunn next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
James Gunn is noted not only as an author of science fiction, but as a critic of the
field and as a chronicler in the story of its development.
Gunn has recently completed the last volume in his four volume series, The Road to Science
Fiction. In this unique work, he traces the development of science fiction from the very
beginning of recorded literature until the present day.
What's different and valuable about Gunn's approach in the road to science fiction is
that he uses the actual literature itself, from tales belonging to the ancient world
and modern short stories.
But each literary selection is accompanied by an essay which discusses the work's importance
and deals with the historical period to which it belongs.
When using the volumes then, a reader not only is getting some good science fiction,
but he's picking up an education relating to the definition and development of science
fiction.
Except for the last one, each volume is also organized around a particular thesis or point.
The first one, for instance, develops the idea that before real science fiction could
exist, mankind had to recognize the concept of change.
It seems to me that the essential nature of science fiction is that it deals with change.
In fact, in order for us to recognize a story or a novel as being science fiction, we have
to identify that part of it which is different from here and now, our everyday world.
And so it deals with how people would react in changed circumstances.
So, up to approximately the time of the Indesta Revolution, the very concept of change itself
was alien to human minds.
It seems to me, looking back over the history of humanity, that mostly people saw change
as being only the eternal circle of the seasons changing from spring to summer to fall to
winter and back again.
And it wasn't until the Indesta Revolution and, of course, the scientific perceptions
that preceded it and accompanied it, which began to create change that people saw could
be beneficial and in which they could, over which they might be able to exercise some
control.
That is, it was man-made change created by human desires and intelligence and it could
be controlled by humanity's exercise of intelligence.
And it seems to me that science fiction was the literary response to that recognition.
The next two volumes develop other ideas that Dunn believes are essential to the development
of science fiction, the notion, for instance, that mankind is a species rather than isolated
tribes or nations or races.
But the last volume is a bit different. This is because it deals with the most recent science
fiction stories and it's more difficult to tell which ones will be important.
In the more current story, this is much more difficult to determine. You can't really say
what stories are important until much after they've been published and you can't certainly
say which are typical until you decide what the period really stands for.
So what I did in the fourth volume was to select stories that I thought dealt with the
literary uses of science fiction. And so that, the volume is primarily concerned not with
questions of generic importance but the question of literary uses.
Gunn has performed a valuable service to the field with the four volumes in his The Road
to Science Fiction series.
By defining science fiction, by demonstrating what makes it different from other types of
literature and by revealing its origins, he's made science fiction more understandable
and more respectable.
Next time we'll talk with Gunn about his own fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy. And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
In much of his science fiction, James Gunn examines the question of what makes man happy.
He extrapolates a future which seems plausible from current social conditions and asks the
standard science fiction question, what if?
In his 1963 novel The Joymakers, he fills out the question by asking what if man discovered
a drug that would make him perfectly happy, even though it would remove him from the real
world.
Gunn answers the question by saying that man would probably accept the opportunity, and
then he shows what happened to man in society as a result.
Ultimately, as it worked out in the novel, it turned out that the people who wanted happiness
to get what they want, since what one can get in the external world is limited by the
number of people, and the number of people who want this particular thing, ultimately
they get what they want by being fed illusions that they get what they want. And ultimately
everybody ends up floating in amniotic cells living on dreams of success and accomplishment
fed by a machine, which I eventually worked out to be that you are happy when you don't
want anything anymore. And it occurred to me that that is the same as death, and ultimately
the equation for that is that happiness equals death, and that life is still wanting something.
One of Gunn's more recent books, The Dreamers, also published in Paperback as The Mind Master,
also presents a society in which man has presumably achieved perfect happiness.
And he does so through chemical memory. Any possible experience can be felt by an individual
if he is injected with the DNA or RNA of someone who has actually undergone that experience.
It is a comment on the fact that dreaming itself is a non-survival characteristic. It may be
satisfying, ultimately the most satisfying experience, but as perhaps I said in The
Joymakers is perhaps repeated here in a different way, that ultimate satisfaction or dreaming
is a death activity, and that survival demands something less than total satisfaction.
Both The Joymakers and The Dreamers, along with many of Gunn's other books, consist of
a series of related novellas, rather than being a straightforward novel. Gunn says that he
started this practice years ago, not long after he began writing science fiction for
a couple of reasons. It allowed him to be paid twice, since he could publish each novella
separately in a magazine before putting it with other novellas to make up a whole novel.
And as a consequence, I have since that time mostly written my novels in the form of publishable
fragments or individual stories. And in a way I think it's worked rather well, because
in The Joymakers I was able to use as a framework, as a subject matter, really an idea rather
than a person or a group of people. And so this novel, which extended over about 200
years, picked up several different people, but basically was about one thing, the science
of happiness. And similarly, the immortals, which also continued for about 200 years,
and the listeners, which took, have covered about 150 years. And all of these seemed to
me to focus on an idea, which is what science fiction mostly does.
We'll continue with the work of James Gunn next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
The science fiction of James Gunn is based on strong, clear ideas that are developed
in stories with a good deal of action in them.
One of his better known books, a 1962 novel entitled The Immortals, is based on a classic
science fiction premise. What if immortality were possible? What would it do to society
and to human nature?
The novel focuses on Marshall Cartwright, who is immortal, and a search forum by Leroy
Weaver, a dying millionaire who wants Cartwright's blood so that he himself can be immortal.
But the novel is more than a chase or a search.
Certainly, the notion of the search for the immortal, the person that I call Cartwright,
Marshall Cartwright, was in there to provide a core of interest. But I was primarily interested
in the novel on the impact of the possibility of immortality on society itself, and interested
in dealing with those kinds of impulses that people have relating to immortality and longevity.
By examining people's reactions to immortality, Gunn hopes to make a point about human nature.
And in a certain sense, the immortals embodies as well as anything else that I've written,
my basic philosophical position in my work that can be traced through almost all of it,
I suspect, that there are no real villains in life. There are only people who want the
same things everybody else wants, but who are willing to do to get them things that
other people are not willing to do. And that the best things in life can be wanted too
much, that if you anything that is considered good can be an evil. And I suppose one of
the basic concepts with which I began the immortals was the concept that everybody thinks
that it would be wonderful to live forever. But what if you had a man who accidentally
could live forever, but who also whose blood could rejuvenate other people, and his life
would be made miserable. And from there, of course, the entire extrapolation about the
ways in which society, knowing the possibility of immortality, would force people, would force
society to pour more and more and more money into medicine until the law of diminishing
returns would mean that half of the world would be devoted to medicine and everybody
else would be starving in the slums. Gun does indeed show the negative effects of
the inequality, cause medical costs to rise drastically, and would also create a society
so obsessed with seeking to live forever that it would forget to live for now.
In 1969 there was a television series based on the immortals. We asked Gun what he thought
of it.
Well I thought it was a total disaster, and that's not uncommon of course, but the resemblances
between the novel and the book are very slight. My book starts with the immortal being a drifter
who comes in and sells a pint of blood, and then disappears for the rest of the novel
until the very end. And the television series is all about the immortal and his being pursued,
and eventually it turns into simply another search for the papers, another fugitive. Somebody
is being chased, but it makes no real difference why he's being chased.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.